---
layout: post
title: "OS: File Structures"
date: 2016-11-16
sources: Modern Operation Systems, Tanenbaum & Bos; lecture
type: summary
---

## File Storage
The computer needs to keep file data in storage, and it has a couple of ways to do so. 

### Contiguous Allocation
One way involves contiguous allocation: the computer stores each file on a continuous set of blocks, which makes it easy to access the file's data in order since all the data are right next to each other. However, requiring all the file data to stay together in storage creates limitations. For example, there might not be enough contiguous space in storage to hold a file, or a file might not have enough room if it needs to grow bigger. 

### Linked List
Another way to store file data involves using a linked list. Different parts of the file are stored in different parts of storage, and each stored section of the file points to the next section of the file. This removes the constraint of needing a continuous piece of storage. However, using the linked list means that it could take a long time to get to a later part of the file, since the computer must traverse through the linked list. This traversal takes an especially long time since the pointers of the linked list are on disk. A similar approach, which uses something called a File Allocation Table, also uses a linked list. Instead of using the actual blocks on disk as nodes, it keeps a file allocation table in memory. This table holds nodes that give the location of the file's blocks, and each of these nodes points to the node for the next block of the file. This still requires traversing a list to find a specific part of a file, but since this table is in memory, traversing the liked list takes less time.

### Indexed Files
Since traversing a linked list takes up time, each file could come up with an array of pointers. Each pointer would point to the block on disk holding the corresponding section of the file. An array access (instead of a linked list traversal) would provide the location of a specific part of a file. However, the array size would have to be specified ahead of time, which could make it difficult to grow a file's size.
Indirection can address the problem of fixed-size pointer tables. In addition to pointers to disk blocks, the array could hold pointers to other tables that point to disk blocks, or that also point to other tables of pointers.

## File Naming
Users can specify files by names, and each file has an index. Therefore the computer needs a way to associate names with file indices. A list of name/index can accomplish this, but finding a specific file in this list would require moving linearly through the list. To avoid linear search, the mapping could be accomplished by using a tree structure or a hash table. The tree structure would take more space, but offer logarithmic search times. A hash table would also offer faster search times at the cost of using more space.
