---
layout: post
title: "Memory: Retrieval-Induced Forgetting"
date: 2017-04-02
sources: lecture; text
type: summary
---

## What is Retrieval-Induced Forgetting?

Retrieval induced forgetting is when selectively remembering something impairs the memory of other, similar objects. For instance, if a subject studies pairs of words including fruit-apple, fruit-pear, drink-water, and drink-juice, then selectively practicing recall of fruit-pear (for example, by being tested with fruit-p__) will disrupt the memory of fruit-apple but not of drink-water or drink-juice.

## What Causes Retrieval-Induced Forgetting?

There are three main hypothesis: blocking, associative weakening, and inhibition.

### Blocking

Practicing one memory (for example, fruit-pear) strengthens the association between "fruit" and "pear". When the subject tries to recall fruit-apple, the stronger association between "fruit" and "apple" blocks the subject from retrieving "pear".

### Associative Weakening

The association between "fruit" and "apple" is weakened during practice, so when the subject tries to recall fruit-pear during test, the association is weakened and therefore the memory is impaired.

### Inhibition

During practice, the memory trace of "apple" interferes with the recall of "pear", so inhibitory mechanisms suppress the memory trace of "apple".

### Experimental Evidence

Experiments show that, after selective practice of fruit-pear, the memory "apple" is impaired even when it is cued by something other than "fruit". This indicates that **blocking** causes retrieval-induced forgetting, since the forgetting is not limited to the association between fruit-apple.

This inhibition happens because the brain tries to reduce conflict in the brain: when "fruit-p\_" is cued, there is some amount of conflict between "pear" and "apple", so the memory for "apple" gets weakened. In other experiments, when practice involves simply reading pairs (as opposed to trying to recall them), retrieval-induced forgetting does not happen because the ease of reading pairs of words does not require conflict resolution. Furthermore, pairs containing less common words (such as fruit-guava) are less inhibited, because the less common word causes less competition with the cued practice pair.

#### Competition-Dependent Learning

The model of competition-dependent learning explains how inhibition occurs. In this model, memories compete for retrieval: memories above a certain inhibition threshold are retrieved while those below the threshold are not retrieved. If memories are close to the threshold, they are strengthened if they are retrieved and weakened if they are not retrieved. However, if they are far from the threshold, then they remain unchanged. This is why practice that induces fiercer competition (providing a partial cue) impairs memory, while practice that induces less competition (having subjects read the pair instead of trying to recall it, or competition involving an uncommon item such as "guava") causes less impairment.
